Well, God’s Word is so rich.
There’s so much in it,
and Galatians 6:1 is no exception.
So, please, let’s turn there,
and we’re going to read the whole thing.
And then we’re going to analyze
Galatians 6:1 phrase by phrase;
there’s a lot in this one verse.
So at Galatians 6:1,
Paul writes:
“Brothers, even if a man
takes a false step
“before he is aware of it,
“you who have spiritual qualifications
“try to readjust such a man
in a spirit of mildness.
“But keep an eye on yourself,
for fear you too may be tempted.”
Now, the first word is “brothers.”
And we notice that that is in the plural.
That may be significant, and we’re going to
come back to that in a few minutes.
Now, Paul says:
“even if a man takes a false step.”
So, what’s the metaphor here?
What is Paul thinking about?
Walking.
He sees a man who is walking down a path.
And all of a sudden, he “takes a false step.”
Now, come to think of it,
this isn’t the first time
that Paul mentions walking
in his letter to the Galatians.
Cast your eye on chapter 5,
and notice verse 16:
“But I say, Keep walking by spirit
and you will carry out
no fleshly desire at all”;
and again, verse 18:
“Furthermore, if you are being led by spirit,
you are not under law”;
and once again, verse 25:
“If we are living by spirit,
let us also go on
walking orderly by spirit”
—literally walking in a straight line;
and then at chapter 6, verse 1:
“brothers, even if a man takes a false step.”
So Paul sees a Christian
who is walking along,
walking in a straight line,
but all of a sudden, he takes a false step.
Question: Is one false step so serious?
Well, those of us who have tried
to walk down
the uneven pavement
on Columbia Heights
and have taken a false step
as we stepped off the curb
and wrenched something
or put something out,
we can testify
that one false step can be serious.
And what about you young brothers,
you basketball players?
You know that sometimes
when you’re on the basketball court,
you take one false step
and you end up on crutches for a few weeks.
So the fact is that one false step
can be serious and, interestingly,
the Greek word
that’s translated “false step” here
allows for a variety of meanings.
It can apply to a minor infraction,
but it can also apply
to a major transgression
—a major sin.
And you’ll notice in the comment today
when we read it
that Galatians 6:1
is being applied to a serious sin.
So it can be applied to both.
Let’s carry on.
He “takes a false step
before he is aware of it.”
Now, what does that mean?
Well, the Greek word here
indicates that the sin is not deliberate.
He didn’t leave home that day with the idea
that he was going to commit a serious sin.
It came upon him unawares.
He was surprised.
Perhaps he got into the wrong crowd,
and all of a sudden,
he ended up doing something
that he really hadn’t planned to do.
It is not deliberate,
but that doesn’t mean
that the sin isn’t serious.
It just means that it was not intentional.
Now, here’s help; help is on the way.
It says: “you who have
spiritual qualifications.”
Well, come to think of it,
the Galatians would know what these are
because at chapter 5, verses 22, 23,
the apostle Paul outlined
the nine aspects
of “the fruitage of the spirit,”
so they would know
what the spiritual qualifications are.
But here’s the point,
as Brother Devine brought out:
Those who give counsel
need to be motivated by the holy spirit,
not by frustration, not by anger.
This is no knee-jerk reaction,
a flash of anger or something.
No, the holy spirit
has to move us to give the counsel.
Now, the next word is interesting.
It says: “You who have
spiritual qualifications try”
—“try.”
Now, you won’t find that word in many Bibles.
I think there’s only one other
besides the New World Translation
that says “try.”
Most of the Bible translations
follow the King James Version.
And the King James Version  says:
‘You who are spiritual restore the man.’
Now, the Greek allows for both.
It allows for an attempt,
or it can be a direct action.
So, now, the translators have to choose.
The original New World Bible
Translation Committee chose “try.”
Why?
Well, they realized that
while there would be an attempt to readjust,
the outcome would depend
on the person who was being readjusted.
Would he really want to change?
Maybe it would be successful,
and maybe it wouldn’t.
And perhaps because Jehovah’s Witnesses
probably do more in giving counsel
and giving help to people than anyone else,
the translation committee
saw the subtlety
at Galatians 6:1.
Well, now, we have a man walking along.
He takes a false step.
What can happen when you take a false step?
You may dislocate a bone.
And that brings us to the word “readjust.”
He says: “Try to readjust such a man.”
Now, you probably know
that the word is a medical term
for setting a fractured bone in place.
So it works really well
with the metaphor, doesn’t it?
You’re walking along, you take a false step,
something gets out of joint,
and now you have to be readjusted.
The bone has to be set in place.
And now we come to
what Brother Devine was talking about:
“in a spirit of mildness.”
And that’s good advice
because sometimes the elders are called upon
to counsel someone who has done something
that they find disgusting
and their emotions could get involved.
They may feel like giving the person
a good tongue-lashing,
but they don’t.
They pray for holy spirit.
And what’s one of the aspects
of the holy spirit?
Mildness.
They pray for a spirit of mildness.
After all, if the person
did something that bad,
he’s probably thoroughly ashamed of himself,
and it may have taken every ounce of courage
that that person has
just to come to the elders.
So we deal with the person in kindness.
So it says: “a spirit of mildness.”
And then the next phrase is:
“But keep an eye on yourself”
—“yourself.”
Wait a minute, that’s singular, isn’t it?
Didn’t we say that
at the beginning of verse 1,
Paul addressed his “brothers”—plural?
But now he is addressing
each and every person
who was called upon to give counsel.
Paul says: “Keep an eye on yourself.”
Now, this calls for a self-examination.
I’m sure that many of us feel very similarly
to the comment that was given this morning.
Many of us who have given counsel for years
can look back with regret at times
—at times when we should have been
more kind, more mild, in giving counsel.
And so it’s good for us to undertake
a self-examination from time to time.
‘How am I coming across in the counsel
that I’m giving to others?’
By using the singular,
Paul is talking to each and every one of us.
If you are an elder,
Paul is talking to you
and Paul is talking to me,
and he’s saying: “Examine yourself.
Examine how your counsel is coming across.”
The final phrase is
“for fear you too may be tempted.”
Now, what does Paul mean by that?
Is he saying that if you hear the details
of what the person has done,
you may want to do the same thing?
No, what he’s reminding us of
is that we are all imperfect.
Paul is saying to us:
“Don’t get on your high horse.
“Don’t be self-righteous
when you’re giving counsel to others.
“Remember, you are imperfect.
“And one day, you could be sitting
on the other side of the table
and receiving counsel.”
And if that were the case,
how would you like to be treated?
In a spirit of mildness.
Keeping our own limitations in mind
will help us to moderate our tone,
to speak to the offender
in a spirit of mildness.
So let’s reread Galatians 6:1:
“Brothers,
“even if a man takes a false step
“before he is aware of it,
“you who have spiritual qualifications
“try to readjust such a man
“in a spirit of mildness.
“But keep an eye on yourself,
for fear you too may be tempted.”
Well, what can we take away
from this brief discussion?
If we can just remember
that counsel must be given in mildness
by those who are moved by holy spirit,
this discussion will have been worth having.